% Machine Learning for Enhanced Electronic Trigger Detection of Diagnostic Errors

Andrew J. Zimolzak, Max Yu, Angela Wu, Li Wei, Usman Mir, Ashish
Gupta, Viral Vaghani, Adel Hassan, Justin Mower, Devika Subramanian,
Hardeep Singh

Due May 2. SIDM scientific abstracts are 400 words (really 2800
characters). Title 100 characters max. Optional: one figure or table
(upload) if abstract is 350 words or less.

# Abstract

Background: Electronic triggers (e-triggers) have been used
extensively to find cases of diagnostic error in large databases, but
they have several limitations. First, they identify patterns that are
only suggestive---not definitive---of error. This means that e-trigger
predictive value is imperfect, and time-consuming manual chart review
is required to separate e-trigger outputs into true and false
instances of missed opportunities for diagnosis (MOD). Second,
e-triggers are often designed from first principles, rather than based
on empiric data patterns, so they may not detect all signals of MOD.
Machine learning (ML) is a promising approach to enhance e-trigger
predictive value and emulate human chart reviewers at larger scale.
Therefore, we sought to create e-triggers with enhanced accuracy,
where records flagged by a first-stage traditional e-trigger are
further refined by a second-stage ML classifier into true and false
MODs.

Methods: Based on the input of an expert panel, we designed two
rules-based e-triggers to find possible MODs, in the emergency
department. First, we found cases of an index ER visit with dizziness
or vertigo, in patients with stroke risk factors, and discharge from
ER to home, followed by hospital admission for stroke or TIA within 30
days. Second, we found cases of an ER visit with abdominal pain, in
patients with abnormal temperature, and discharge from ER to home,
followed by hospital admission within 30 days. Trained clinicians
reviewed a random sample of charts flagged by the e-trigger and
labeled each as MOD or no MOD. Labeled charts were used for training
and test datasets for ML methods including regularized logistic
regression and random forests. ML had access to demographics, lab
values, vital signs, medications, test orders, and encounter
diagnoses.

Results: For the dizziness e-trigger, 38 records were true positive
MOD, of 82 flagged (46% positive predictive value [PPV]). The
best-performing ML algorithm correctly identified 37 of the 38 true
positives and 43 of 44 true negatives (97% PPV). For the abdominal
pain e-trigger, 31 records were true positive MOD, of 104 flagged (30%
PPV). ML correctly identified 26 of 31 true positives and 71
of 73 true negatives (93% PPV).

Conclusions: We successfully applied machine learning to enhance the
accuracy of electronic triggers to find missed opportunities for
diagnosis, using structured data only. This approach improved
predictive value and missed few cases of true MOD. Limitations include
time needed to prepare variables used by ML, although once this is
done, the algorithm can run at large scale. Next steps include
applying our two-stage approach to other rules-based e-triggers for
diagnostic error.
